[Capture] Fall back to tape transforms if `plxpr_transform` isn't available (#6922)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-dev.md

<h3>New features since last release</h3>

> * PennyLane transforms that return a single tape and null processing functions can now be used with
>   program capture enabled, even if a `plxpr_transform` is not provided.
>   [(#6922)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6922)
> 
>   The transform will fail if the transformed function contains control flow with dynamic parameters.
>   This includes:
>   * `qml.cond` with dynamic parameters as predicates.
>   * `qml.for_loop` with dynamic parameters for ``start``, ``stop``, or ``step``.
>   * `qml.while_loop` does not work.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
* Traditional tape transforms in PennyLane can be automatically converted to work with program capture enabled.
  [(#6922)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6922)
  
  As an example, here is a custom tape transform, working with capture enabled, that shifts every `qml.RX` gate to the end of the circuit:
  
  ```python
  qml.capture.enable()
  
  @qml.transform
  def shift_rx_to_end(tape):
      """Transform that moves all RX gates to the end of the operations list."""
      new_ops, rxs = [], []

      for op in tape.operations:
          if isinstance(op, qml.RX):
              rxs.append(op)
          else:
                new_ops.append(op)
 
      operations = new_ops + rxs
      new_tape = qml.tape.QuantumScript(
          operations, tape.measurements, shots=tape.shots, trainable_params=tape.trainable_params
      )
      return [new_tape], lambda res: res[0]

  @qml.capture.expand_plxpr_transforms
  @shift_rx_to_end
  @qml.qnode(qml.device("default.qubit", wires=1))
  def circuit():
      qml.RX(0.1, wires=0)
      qml.H(wires=0)
      return qml.state()
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> print(qml.draw(circuit)())
  0: ──H──RX(0.10)─┤  State
  ```
  
  There are some exceptions to getting tape transforms to work with capture enabled:
  * Transforms that return multiple tapes cannot be converted
  * Transforms that return and non-trivial postprocessing functions cannot be converted
  * Transforms will fail if the transformed quantum function or QNode contains:
    * `qml.cond` with dynamic parameters as predicates.
    * `qml.for_loop` with dynamic parameters for ``start``, ``stop``, or ``step``.
    * `qml.while_loop` does not work.
````

Reviewer: Side note, that code example doesn't work 🤔 

```python
qml.capture.enable()

@qml.transform
def shift_rx_to_end(tape):
    """Transform that moves all RX gates to the end of the operations list."""
    new_ops, rxs = [], []

    for op in tape.operations:
        if isinstance(op, qml.RX):
            rxs.append(op)
        else:
            new_ops.append(op)

    operations = new_ops + rxs
    new_tape = qml.tape.QuantumScript(
        operations, tape.measurements, shots=tape.shots, trainable_params=tape.trainable_params
    )
    return [new_tape], lambda res: res[0]

@qml.capture.expand_plxpr_transforms
@shift_rx_to_end
@qml.qnode(qml.device("default.qubit", wires=1))
def circuit():
    qml.RX(0.1, wires=0)
    qml.H(wires=0)
    return qml.state()

print(qml.draw(circuit)())
```

```
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ValueError                                Traceback (most recent call last)
Cell In[4], line 28
     25     qml.H(wires=0)
     26     return qml.state()
---> 28 print(qml.draw(circuit)())

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/drawer/draw.py:270, in draw.<locals>.wrapper(*args, **kwargs)
    268 @wraps(qnode)
    269 def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
--> 270     tape = qml.tape.make_qscript(qnode)(*args, **kwargs)
    272     if wire_order:
    273         _wire_order = wire_order

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/tape/qscript.py:1379, in make_qscript.<locals>.wrapper(*args, **kwargs)
   1377 def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
   1378     with AnnotatedQueue() as q:
-> 1379         fn(*args, **kwargs)
   1381     return QuantumScript.from_queue(q, shots)

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/capture/expand_transforms.py:101, in expand_plxpr_transforms.<locals>.wrapper(*args, **kwargs)
     98 @wraps(f)
     99 def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
    100     transformed_f = ExpandTransformsInterpreter()(f)
--> 101     return transformed_f(*args, **kwargs)

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/capture/base_interpreter.py:401, in PlxprInterpreter.__call__.<locals>.wrapper(*args, **kwargs)
    398     jaxpr = jax.make_jaxpr(partial(flat_f, **kwargs))(*args)
    400 flat_args = jax.tree_util.tree_leaves(args)
--> 401 results = self.eval(jaxpr.jaxpr, jaxpr.consts, *flat_args)
    402 assert flat_f.out_tree
    403 # slice out any dynamic shape variables

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/capture/base_interpreter.py:364, in PlxprInterpreter.eval(self, jaxpr, consts, *args)
    362 if custom_handler:
    363     invals = [self.read(invar) for invar in eqn.invars]
--> 364     outvals = custom_handler(self, *invals, **eqn.params)
    365 elif getattr(primitive, "prim_type", "") == "operator":
    366     outvals = self.interpret_operation_eqn(eqn)

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/transforms/core/transform_dispatcher.py:93, in _register_primitive_for_expansion.<locals>._(self, inner_jaxpr, args_slice, consts_slice, targs_slice, tkwargs, *invals)
     90     return copy(self).eval(inner_jaxpr, consts, *inner_args)
     92 jaxpr = jax.make_jaxpr(wrapper)(*args)
---> 93 jaxpr = plxpr_transform(jaxpr.jaxpr, jaxpr.consts, targs, tkwargs, *args)
     94 return copy(self).eval(jaxpr.jaxpr, jaxpr.consts, *args)

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/transforms/core/transform_dispatcher.py:65, in _create_plxpr_fallback_transform.<locals>.plxpr_fallback_transform(jaxpr, consts, targs, tkwargs, *args)
     62     return tuple(out)
     64 abstracted_axes, abstract_shapes = qml.capture.determine_abstracted_axes(args)
---> 65 return jax.make_jaxpr(wrapper, abstracted_axes=abstracted_axes)(*abstract_shapes, *args)

    [... skipping hidden 14 frame]

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/transforms/core/transform_dispatcher.py:42, in _create_plxpr_fallback_transform.<locals>.plxpr_fallback_transform.<locals>.wrapper(*inner_args)
     41 def wrapper(*inner_args):
---> 42     tape = qml.tape.plxpr_to_tape(jaxpr, consts, *inner_args)
     43     with qml.capture.pause():
     44         tapes, _ = tape_transform(tape, *targs, **tkwargs)

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/tape/plxpr_conversion.py:225, in plxpr_to_tape(plxpr, consts, shots, *args)
    184 """Convert a plxpr into a tape.
    185 
    186 Args:
   (...)    221 
    222 """
    224 collector = CollectOpsandMeas()
--> 225 collector.eval(plxpr, consts, *args)
    226 assert collector.state
    227 return QuantumScript(collector.state["ops"], collector.state["measurements"], shots=shots)

File ~/.virtualenvs/pl-proto-transforms/lib/python3.11/site-packages/pennylane/capture/base_interpreter.py:376, in PlxprInterpreter.eval(self, jaxpr, consts, *args)
    374     if not primitive.multiple_results:
    375         outvals = [outvals]
--> 376     for outvar, outval in zip(eqn.outvars, outvals, strict=True):
    377         self._env[outvar] = outval
    379 # Read the final result of the Jaxpr from the environment

ValueError: zip() argument 2 is shorter than argument 1
```

Author: Thanks for catching this, I'll look into it :)

Author: @isaacdevlugt this is unrelated to tape fallback. It's because we don't correctly handle converting qnodes into tapes with `plxpr_to_tape`. I'll create a story to track this.

<h4>Capturing and representing hybrid programs</h4>

* Traditional tape transforms in PennyLane can be automatically converted to work with program capture enabled.
  [(#6922)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/6922)

  As an example, here is a custom tape transform, working with capture enabled, that shifts every `qml.RX` gate to the end of the circuit:

  ```python
  qml.capture.enable()

  @qml.transform
  def shift_rx_to_end(tape):
      """Transform that moves all RX gates to the end of the operations list."""
      new_ops, rxs = [], []

      for op in tape.operations:
          if isinstance(op, qml.RX):
              rxs.append(op)
          else:
                new_ops.append(op)

      operations = new_ops + rxs
      new_tape = tape.copy(operations=operations)
      return [new_tape], lambda res: res[0]

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
  A requirement for tape transforms to be compatible with program capture is to further decorate QNodes with the experimental `qml.capture.expand_plxpr_transforms` decorator.
```python
````
